Section 4 of "Meeting Recorder Project: Dialog Act Labeling Guide"
(ICSI TR-04-002) gives a detailed description of how the APs were annotated.
This file describes adjacency pair indexing in further detail, as well as
post-annotation AP markings.

There are two fields in the MRDA corpus dealing with AP annotations, the
Adjacency Pair and Original Adjacency Pair fields.  Every section in this
file deals with the Original Adjacency Pair field, except for the
"Renumbered APs" section.


General AP Indexing Notes
-------------------------

-  Adjacency pairs consist of two parts, where each part is produced
   by a different speaker.  The first part is an "a" part and the second
   is a "b" part.  For more information regarding adjacency pairs, 
   refer to the labeling manual.

-  A numerical value, or index, is assigned to each pair to show
   the correspondence of a particular "a" to a particular "b".
   Note that mere sequentiality in time is not sufficient since
   pairs can overlap.

-  Numerical values are entered sequentially within each file of a
   meeting used for labeling.  (The files used for labeling were ten
   minute "chunks" or slices of the meeting.)  Numerical values are not
   sequential throughout entire meetings, only throughout the individual
   chunks (see next point below).  Consequently, adjacency pairs in the
   DADB files periodically recycle to an index of 1 near multiples of 600
   seconds, regardless of the previous AP index.

-  The convention of entering numerical values sequentially within
   individual ten minute chunks was implemented some time after the
   labeling task had begun.  Prior to the implementation of this
   convention, there was a convention in which the numerical values of
   adjacency pairs were recycled within individual meeting chunks such
   that, upon reaching a certain value (usually between 10 and 40), the
   following AP would have a numerical value of 1.  The convention was
   that the index for an AP should serve only to unambiguously identify
   which utterances are members of the same AP.  Labelers could recycle
   through the indexing, starting again at 1, at any number greater
   than 10.  How high they went before recycling has no meaning (it
   was based on annotator preference and the way meetings were labeled
   in chunks).

-  Meetings in which numerical values for adjacency pairs were cycled
   are listed below:

   Bed003
   Bed009
   Bed011
   Bmr008
   Bmr009
   Bmr014
   Bmr026
   Bro004
   Bro005
   Bro012
   Bro018

- APs inserted manually by annotators after sequential AP annotation was
  completed are marked with an underscore ('_').  For example, if an AP
  needs to be inserted between the 15th and 16th AP in a 10-minute meeting
  chunk, it is marked as '15_a' for the first part of the AP and '15_b'
  for the second part.


AP Corrections and Questionable APs
-----------------------------------
The APs went through an error-checking process after the annotations were
completed by the labelers.  This process revealed both correctable and
questionable AP markings.  The correctable APs were updated for this
release, a "FIXED AP" note was added to the Comments field in these lines,
and the Start and Info fields were logged in doc/lists/fixed_aps.txt.  Two
specific types of errors (fg/fh/b and ^m/^2 errors) are described in the
next two sections.

The questionable APs may have been due to a malfunction in one or more of
the microphones involved, a mislabeled AP that is ambiguous, a residual of
data processing, or some other problem that cannot easily be resolved.
Questionable APs are divided into two cases, each with a different marking
to differentiate them.  Case I is the general marking given, while Case II
is for a specific questionable AP.


Case I:
When a questionable AP part is found, if possible, it is corrected.
Otherwise, it is surrounded by the symbol '@'.  Please note that it is the
AP part that is surrounded, not necessarily the entire AP.  AP parts are the
units separated by the period '.' symbol.

Examples:
@6a@.7a
@44b@.45a
@64a+@
38b.@39a@

Large areas of AP problems to note:
Bed014 from about 3109s to 3172s
    All microphones are shut off except channel 1.  The conversation
    continues, but since the MRDA data only includes close-talking
    utterances, only channel 1 remains.
Bmr020 from about 1488s to 1557s
    Channel 1 has a problem with its microphone, and is only heard in
    the far-field microphones.


Case II:
A more specific case of questionable AP labels deals with when the AP parts
occur out of order, i.e. a DA segment where the "b" part precedes a DA
segment with the "a" part of the same AP.  For the majority of these cases,
the start times of the two DA segments are very close.  These "out of order"
AP parts may occur for several reasons:

1. The start times of the two DA segments are extremely close (less than
   0.05 seconds).  They were likely labeled in order, but after doing a
   forced alignment the timings changed slightly to place them out of
   order.
2. The "b" part does not occur at the beginning of the DA segment it is in,
   but later on.  Therefore, the words preceding where the "b" part occurs
   could have start times prior to when the DA segment with the "a" part
   begins.
3. There was some sort of labeler error for the AP pair.

Because the reasons for these "out of order" APs vary and cannot be
automatically determined, we simply surrounded these AP parts (and the other
AP parts with the same AP number) with the symbol '!' so they can be
identified and dealt with as desired.  Please note that only the "out of
order" AP part is surrounded in each case, not necessarily the entire AP.


APs with fg/fh/b DAs
--------------------
According to Section 4.4 of "Meeting Recorder Project: Dialog Act Labeling
Guide" (ICSI TR-04-002), DA segments with labels "fg" "fh" and "b" should
never be marked with APs.  However, there are several cases where these
segments have AP labels, even after a round of AP fixes (for other problems).
We removed these labels while adding the phrase "REMOVED AP" to the comments
field.  We also adjusted any affected APs, added the phrase "ADJUSTED AP" to
the comments field, and logged the adjustments in doc/lists/fixed_aps.txt.
136 APs were removed, and 130 APs were adjusted.  The file
doc/lists/fg_fh_b.txt lists the 136 removed APs.


APs missing when DAs have ^m or ^2
----------------------------------
Section 4.4 of "Meeting Recorder Project: Dialog Act Labeling Guide"
(ICSI TR-04-002) states that mimics (^m) and collaborative completions (^2)
are always marked with APs.  After a round of AP fixes and fixing cases for
fg/fh/b, we found 156 DA units in the corpus marked with ^m or ^2 that did
not have any AP markings.  These units are listed in doc/lists/m_2.txt.

We added the appropriate adjacency pair parts to almost all of these data and
added "INSERTED AP" to the comment field (or "ADJUSTED (M/2) AP" when an AP
part existed but was changed).  A small number of cases required a different
correction or were left without a label.  These cases are described in
doc/lists/m_2-exceptions.txt.

Some labels of ^2 or ^m occur with questionable APs.  These were investigated
and the proper corrections were made.  Sometimes this involved fixing
incorrect DA labels (a ^2 or a ^m that was inappropriate), fixing incorrect
APs, or both.  Fixed APs are noted in doc/lists/fixed_aps.txt.  Special
corrections are noted in doc/lists/m_2-exceptions.txt.


Renumbered APs
--------------
Because of the inconsistency in AP indexing (see the "General AP Indexing
Notes section" above), a renumbering of the APs was done, with the result
in the Adjacency Pair field.

The renumbering was done as follows:
      1. First, we assume that the DA lines are sorted by start time.
         (They are already sorted this way in the .dadb files.)
      2. Stepping through line by line, begin numbering AP indices in
         multiples of 10, leaving the rest unchanged.
      3. When there are multiple speakers per AP part, number according
         to order of appearance (e.g. 4a-1 first, then 4a-2, 4a-3, etc.).
      4. When there are multiple AP parts in a line, go from lowest to
         highest by AP index, from left to right.
