The MRDA data are divided into two files, .dadb and .trans files.  We will
describe each file below.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
DA database file format description (.dadb):

The DA database files (files ending in .dadb) consist of a sequence of
lines, each corresponding to one DA unit. Each line contains
comma-separated fields, which are ordered from left to right as follows:


Start Time: Start time of the words in the transcription field.  This
	is taken from the forced alignment time of the first word of the
	transcript.  Note: word times are based on forced alignments from
	the SRI recognizer.  These forced alignments are based on the
	true words from the MRT files from the ICSI Meeting Corpus
	version 1.0 transcripts.

End Time: End time of the words in the transcription field.  This is
	taken from the forced alignment time of the last word of the
	transcript.  Note: word times are based on forced alignments
	from the SRI recognizer.  These forced alignments are based on
	the true words from the MRT files from the ICSI Meeting Corpus
	version 1.0 transcripts.

Utterance ID: Unique ID for each utterance in the following format:

	<Meeting/Channel Info>_<Start Time (in ms)>_<End Time (in ms)>

	e.g. Bdb001-cb_1595340_1599520
	     Bed009-c2_0001990_0002170

	Note that the times are always 7 digits, with the appropriate number
        of leading and trailing zeroes.  Also note that this field is
	redundant, and can be generated from other fields, but we include it
	in the database for convenience.

Error Code: Code that describes errors in the alignment of
	transcription words to forced alignment output.  The code is
	required to have one uppercase letter, and can optionally have
	one or two digits that follow.  Example error codes are A, A1, B, B2,
	W, W12, etc.  The code can be interpreted by the key below:

       CODE  Meaning
       -------------
       A     All words in Transcription field matched forced alignment words.
	     Therefore all words have individual start and end times.  In
	     addition, there are no added MRT words to the DA unit, unless
	     the A code is followed by a 2 code.

       B     Bleeped line. (Material removed from official corpus release
	     due to participant censoring.)

       D     Digits task portion.  (Material removed from the DA corpus
	     corresponding to the MRT segments marked with the "DigitTask"
	     tag.)

       M     All words in Transcription field matched forced alignment words.
	     However, the DA unit has one or more MRT words, surrounded by
	     angled braces <>, added into the the DA unit, not including MRT
	     words added to the beginning of the DA unit, which is denoted by
	     a 2 code.

       V     One or more words from the beginning and end of the Transcription
	     field did not match a word from forced alignment.  The start time
	     given for the whole utterance (field 1) is assigned the start
	     time of the first matched word from the Transcription field.
	     The end time given for the whole utterance (field 2) is assigned
	     the end time of the last matched word from the Transcription
	     field.  The unmatched words are given XXXX times in the Internal
	     Word Times field and are enclosed by curly braces {} in the
	     Transcription field.

       W     One or more words from the beginning of the Transcription field
	     did not match a word from forced alignment.  The start time
	     given for the whole utterance (field 1) is assigned the start
	     time of the first matched word from the Transcription field.
	     The unmatched words are given XXXX times in the Internal Word
	     Times field and are enclosed by curly braces {} in the
	     Transcription field.

       X     One or more words from the middle of the Transcription field
	     did not match a word from forced alignment.  The unmatched words
	     are given XXXX times in the Internal Word Times field and are
	     enclosed by curly braces {} in the Transcription field.

       Y     One or more words from the end of the Transcription field did
	     not match a word from forced alignment.  The end time given
	     for the whole utterance (field 2) is assigned the end time of
	     the last matched word from the Transcription field.  The
	     unmatched words are given XXXX times in the Internal Word Times
	     field and are enclosed by curly braces {} in the Transcription
	     field.

       Z     No words from the Transcription field matched words from forced
	     alignment.  All internal word times are assigned XXXX and the
	     Start Time and End Time fields reflect times originally given to
	     the labelers (based on older versions of the meeting data).  All
	     words in the Transcription field are enclosed by curly braces {}.

       1     Transcription seems to contain some type of error, but we
             did not make any changes to the transcript in order to remain
	     consistent with the officially released MRT transcripts.

       2     One or more MRT words are added to the beginning of the DA unit.
	     These words are surrounded by angled braces <>.

Internal Word Times: Start and end times of each word in the
	transcription field.  These are taken from the forced
	alignment times.  This field is formatted as follows:
	tA1+tA2+A|tB1+tB2+B|tC1+tC2+C|...

	where
		tA1 = start time of word A
		tA2 = end time of word A
		A = word A
		etc.

	If a transcription word did not find a match in the forced
	alignment, tA1 and tA2 are assigned "XXXX" since there is no
	start or end time associated with them, and A is enclosed in
	curly braces {} (e.g. XXXX+XXXX+{you}).  If the word is an
	unmatched MRT word, A is enclosed in angled braces <> (e.g.
	tA1+tA2+<me>).

DA Label: Dialog Act annotations, as described in the document"Meeting
	Recorder Project: Dialog Act Labeling Guide."  Note that for digit
	task lines (see digit-reading.txt) and bleeped lines (see
	bleeped.txt) there is no DA label.

Meeting/Channel Info: Meeting name (according to the Meeting Recorder
	Naming Conventions) and channel number (based on the Participant
	and Channel tags in the MRT files, except channel letters are
	lower-cased.)  The info in this field is according to the format:
	<meeting name>-c<channel>

Speaker: Speaker label, in the format [mf][en]### (see Meeting Recorder
	 documentation for more details).

Original DA Label: Dialog Act annotations with original sj labels.
	The annotations are described in further detail in the
	document, "Meeting Recorder Project: Dialog Act Labeling
	Guide."  Note that for digit task lines (see digit-reading.txt) and
	bleeped lines (see doc/bleeped.txt) there is no DA label.

Adjacency Pair: Adjacency pair annotations after renumbering (see
	doc/ap-indexing.txt).  APs are described in "Meeting Recorder
	Project: Dialog Act Labeling Guide."

Original Adjacency Pair: Adjacency pair annotations made by labelers,
	described in "Meeting Recorder Project: Dialog Act Labeling Guide"
	and doc/ap-indexing.txt.

Hot Spot: Hot spot annotation as described in the Hot spot annotation guide.

Hot Spot Comment: Comments made by the hot spot labelers in regards to the
	hot spot annotations.

Comment: Comments made by the dialog act annotators in regards to DA and AP
	annotations.



----------------------------------------------------------------------
Transcript file format description (.trans):

The transcript files (files ending in .trans) consist of a sequence of
lines, each corresponding to one DA unit.  Each line contains
comma-separated fields, which are ordered from left to right as follows:



Utterance ID: Same as in the .dadb file (see above for explanation).

Original CSV Transcription: Original word and punctuation
	transcription after annotation by the labelers.
	Transcription and punctuation conventions are described in
	"Meeting Recorder Project: Dialog Act Labeling Guide."

Transcription: Word and punctuation transcription just as in the
	Original CSV Transcription field, except words are updated to
	be consistent with the MRT words.  Transcription and
	punctuation conventions are described in "Meeting Recorder
	Project: Dialog Act Labeling Guide" and the Hot Spot Annotation Guide
	(for understanding the double star markings '**').

