Quick Note:  The meetings Bmr005 and Bro005 in particular have more
occurrances of missing MRT words than the other meetings.
(See doc/lists/unmatched-mrt-words.txt for more details.)


Words in the DA database transcripts match those in the MRT files in
the official ICSI corpus release.  However, there are four issues
to be aware of with respect to transcripts:

 1. Punctuation and capitalization differ from MRT versions

 2. Comments specify mismatches between MRT transcripts and
    transcripts used during the DA labeling

 3. MRT transcripts were postprocessed to best map words to
    that of SRI recognizer for forced alignment

 4. Unmiked speech is not included in the DA database.


1. Punctuation and Capitalization:

Transcripts in the DADB Transcription field are identical to those in the
corpus MRT files, except for punctuation and capitalization
differences.  As described in detail in the labeling manual, DA
labeling required hand-segmenting the orginal MRT transcripts to
produce DA-level segments.  Each line in the database corresponds to
one DA unit, and contains one final punctuation symbol (including
symbols for incomplete utterances).  These punctuation units differ
from the punctuation used in the original transcripts (although often
they coincide).  We also removed original capitalization, because it is
unnecessary for both DA processing and forced alignment (acronyms are
not ambiguous because they are marked with underscores) and could be
confusing since it would not match up with our punctuation units.

MPF (merged punctuation format) files that log punctuation for both the
MRT and DADB files are included in the align_mrt_dadb directory.  For more
detail on these files, read align_mrt_dadb/README.


2. Reconciliation of Original Transcripts and MRT transcripts

When the labelers began annotating the meeting data, they started with
transcript versions that were older than the final MRT files that were
released with the ICSI Meeting Corpus.  Labelers also occasionally
made fixes to the original transcripts after listening to the audio.
As a result, there are some inconsistencies between the original
DA-labeled transcripts (which we refer to as "CSV" files) and the
released MRT transcripts.

These differences are important since DA punctuation exists only in
the CSV (not the MRT) files.  A by-hand pass was made to reconcile most
cases in which differences contained multiple words.  The dialog act
lines affected by this pass have "FBH" in the comment field (FBH stands
for "Fixed By Hand" and is used for any by-hand fixes).  At the time of
this release, not all inconsistencies have been reconciled.  However,
the differences have been automatically marked and recorded, according
to the following conventions (which apply to the Internal Word Times
and Transcription fields):

     Case 1:  Words in CSV transcripts but not in MRT
	      transcripts are enclosed in curly braces { }.

     Case 2:  Words in MRT transcripts but not in CSV
              transcripts are enclosed in angled brackets < >.

Words in the Case 2 category that are found in the middle of a dialog
act unit are placed in the appropriate location between the same words
as in the MRT transcripts.  When the inserted word is in between two
words where a punctuation unit exists (a pipe or a dash) in the
Transcription field, the word is automatically inserted AFTER the
punctuation unit.

When words in the Case 2 category are found in between dialog act
units, they are placed in the beginning of the second dialog act unit.
The Start Time does not change due to the added words, but reflects the
start time of the first non-braced word in the Transcription field
(i.e. the first word not surrounded by curly or angled braces).

Please note that these automatic insertions are not always correct.
For example, an inserted word could sometimes be better placed before
a punctuation unit instead of after it.  Inserting a word can also
cause a punctuation unit to be needed, or a punctuation unit to become
obsolete.  Words that are added to the beginning of a DA unit may be
better placed at the end of the previous DA unit, or in its their DA
unit.

An attempt was made to manually add missing MRT words that occurred between
DA segments.  While such words would exist in the DADB files with angled
braces <> even without any alteration, a manual pass is useful because some of
these missing MRT words are one-word backchannels or responses, which
contribute new segments, new DAs, and possibly new APs.  Bmr005 had many such
missing MRT words that were added manually.

Overall, the differences described above constitute a small portion of
the data.  The file transcript-matchrate.dat lists the number of DA
units that have the error code A, which means all the words in the DA
unit are reconciled (see database-format.txt).


3. Text Normalization for ASR (Forced Alignment)

It should also be noted that MRT words were text-normalized prior to
input to the SRI recognizer. This was done to optimize forced
alignment results by limiting the number of instances of
out-of-vocabulary words.  The mapping is completely documented, as
follows:

	- convert MRT transcripts to a "TRS" transcript
	  using two scripts:

		/scripts/mrt_tag (using the -t option)

		/scripts/mrt2list

	- process the TRS format to map and text-normalize words
	  using one script:

	       /scripts/post_process2

In the post_process2 script, several mappings take place to obtain the
best acoustic match possible for forced alignment.  Of note are some
text normalizations and the treatment of hyphenated words.  The text
normalizations include mapping several words (e.g. mm-hmm, um-hmm,
uh-huh, cuz, etc.) to in-vocabulary words for the SRI recognizer
(uhhuh, because, etc.).  Other normalizations include fixing certain
spelling errors and expanding certain contractions.

The text normalizations merge certain hyphenated words (like
mm-hmm and uh-huh) to single words.  The remaining hyphenated words
are treated in the following way:

1.  Using the vocab list from SRI's HUB-5 recognition system, the
    hyphenated word is checked to see if it exists.  If so, it is kept
    as is.

2.  If not, the hyphens are removed from the word, and the compound
    word is checked with the vocab list.  If this compound word
    exists, it is what is used for forced alignment.

3.  If the compound word in step 2 is not found in the vocab list,
    each component of the hyphenated word is checked separately for
    existence in the vocabulary list.  If all the components are
    found, then each component is used as a separate word for forced
    alignment.  If one or more of the components is not in the vocab
    list, the hyphenated word is left in its original state and passed
    on to the recognizer.

It is important to note that the above algorithm does not always
produce the optimal input into the recognition system.  For example,
the hyphenated word "lisp-y" is separated into the two words "lisp"
and "y" because both are words listed in the vocab file, while
"lisp-y" and "lispy" are not.  ("y" is in the vocab list as the spoken
letter y.)  This is suboptimal because the "y" in "lisp-y" is not
pronounced the same way as the letter "y" in the dictionary.  We have
decided to live with cases like this to keep the algorithm simple and
automatic.


4. Exclusion of Unmiked Speech

Unmiked speech is not included in this database.  In the ICSI Meeting
Recorder documentation (overview.txt), unmiked speech (called
non-close-miked speech below) is described:

    Unmiked speakers, non-standard microphone configurations -- In
    general, we tried to ensure that all meeting participants wore
    close-talking microphones, but there are occasional exceptions to
    this rule, noted in the headers of individual meetings.  We excluded
    meetings from the corpus where an unmiked speaker was a principal
    talker, but several meetings do contain significant amounts of
    non-close-miked speech (due to microphone failures, unmiked observers
    offering comments, etc.). 

In the MRT files, unmiked speech can be seen by looking for the
CloseMic="false" attribute to the Segment tag.  Below is an example from
Bdb001.mrt.

    <Segment StartTime="6.260" EndTime="6.864" Participant="fe016" CloseMic="false">
      Right.
    </Segment>
